Editorial review of Add Create a backend add-on section in the Developer guide with GenericSetup #1757 (#2083)
plone/documentation: docs/backend/generic-setup.md

You can always change the configuration options through either Plone or the {term}`Zope Management Interface` (ZMI), and then export the resulting profile as an XML file.
To export, navigate to {menuselection}`Site Setup --> Management Interface`, then click {guilabel}`portal_setup`, and finally click the {guilabel}`Export` tab to select the steps to export.

Directly editing XML profile files does not change anything on the site, even after a Zope restart.
This is because run-time TTW configurable items are stored in the database, instead of the file system.

If you edit profile files, you need to either reimport the edited files using the `portal_setup` tool or fully rerun the add-on package installer by navigating to {menuselection}`Site Setup --> Add-ons`.
The import or rerun will read XML files and change the Plone database accordingly.

```{note}
ZCML changes affect loaded Python code in all sites inside Zope, whereas GenericSetup XML files affect only one Plone site and its database.
GenericSetup XML files are always database changes.

Creating relationships between ZCML and site-specific behavior is usually done using {doc}`layers </develop/plone/views/layers>`.

> ZCML directives, like viewlets and views, are registered to be active only on a certain layer using the `layer` attribute.

Author: These changes were a best guess, based on the original text which made no sense to me.

</configure>
```

### Multiple profiles

When you have more than one profile in your add-on package, the add-ons control panel decides which one to use when you install it.

When there is a `default` profile, it's used as the installation profile, except when this `default` profile is marked in an `INonInstallable` utility.
In this case, it's ignored, and Plone falls back to using the first profile sorted alphabetically by `name`.

```{versionchanged} Plone 5.1
The profile `name` of `default` now takes precedence over the `name` of the first profile sorted alphabetically.
In previous versions, the first profile sorted alphabetically by `name` was chosen without regard to the `default` name.

> ```

Author: This entire section needs careful technical review. Please help by adding a comment.

Reviewer: Looks accurate to me

## Add-on properties

Add-on packages may contain any of the following items.

-   A default GenericSetup XML profile, which is automatically run when the package is installed using the quick-installer.
    The profile name is usually `default`.

> -   Other profiles, which the user may install using the ZMI {guilabel}`portal_setup` under the {guilabel}`Export` tab, or which can be manually enabled for unit tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Other profiles, which the user may install using the ZMI {guilabel}`portal_setup` under the {guilabel}`Import` tab, or which can be manually enabled for unit tests.
```

Export gives you xml files representing the current configuration. It is not frequently used, and it's not what this paragraph was talking about.

> -   An `setup_various` step, which runs Python code every time the GenericSetup XML profile is installed.

Author: Note that I renamed this from "Import various" because it didn't exist, so I made a best guess from the rest of the text.

>     See {ref}`genericsetup-custom-installer-code-label`.

Reviewer: I would remove this line. There isn't a predefined "import various" step. Adding a custom one was an old technique to work around the fact that we didn't have `post_handler` yet. But now we do. I'll also make a comment below re removing the discussion of that old technique.

> -   A `pre_handler` or `post_handler` when you use GenericSetup 1.8.2 or later.

Author: Note that there is no `handler` in this list.

Reviewer: That's correct. The main part of applying the profile is done by executing all of the registered import steps, not by executing an explicitly configured `handler`.

    See {ref}`genericsetup-custom-installer-code-label`.

```{seealso}
[Custom import steps](https://web.archive.org/web/20151016163743/https://plone.293351.n2.nabble.com/indexing-of-content-created-by-Generic-Setup-td4454703.html)

> ```

Author: I have doubts that this ancient post is still helpful. Should I remove it?

Reviewer: Remove it, it's showing old ways of doing things. We might want to document how to add a custom import step, but that post is no longer accurate for how to do that.

## List available profiles

List all known profiles for the Plone instance.

```python

> setup_tool = self.portal.portal_setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from plone import api
setup_tool = api.portal.get_tool("portal_setup")
```

profiles = setup_tool.listProfileInfo()
for profile in profiles:

>     print str(profile)

Reviewer: print is a function in Python 3
```suggestion
    print(str(profile))
```

...
```

## Install a profile

This section describes how to install a profile and enable add-ons for unit tests.

### `plone.app.testing`

See [Product and profile installation](https://github.com/plone/plone.app.testing#product-and-profile-installation).

### Manual installation

You might want to install profiles manually if they need to be enabled only for certain tests.

The profile name is in the format `profile-${package_name}:${profile id}`.

> Run the extended profile of the `your.addonpackage` package for unit tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, this runs the `extended` profile of the `your.addonpackage` package.
```

```python
setup_tool.runAllImportStepsFromProfile('your.addonpackage:extended')
```

```{versionchanged} Products.GenericSetup 1.8.0
Since `Products.GenericSetup` 1.8.0, the `profile-` prefix is optional.
In previous versions, the prefix was required, for example, `profile-your.addonpackage:extended`.
GenericSetup supports both forms.
```

## Missing upgrade procedure

In the {guilabel}`Add-ons` control panel, you may see a warning that your add-on package is [missing an upgrade procedure](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/15316583/how-to-define-a-procedure-to-upgrade-an-add-on).

This means you need to write some {ref}`genericsetup-upgrade-steps-label`.

(genericsetup-uninstall-profile-label)=

## Uninstall profile

> When you deactivate an add-on in the control panel, Plone looks for a profile with the name `uninstall` and applies it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you uninstall an add-on in the control panel, Plone looks for a profile with the name `uninstall` and applies it.
```

(Currently the button is labeled Uninstall, not Deactivate)

> GenericSetup profile can contain dependencies to other add-on package installers and profiles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A GenericSetup profile can contain dependencies to other add-on package installers and profiles.
```

</metadata>
```

> ## Metadata version numbers

Author: For this section, see my comment from the original PR at https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1757#discussion_r3230247154.

The metadata `version` number in your {file}`metadata.xml` indicates the version of your add-on package.
It's used to determine whether the add-on package needs to be upgraded.

Upgrade steps are executed in the Python version sort order, according to [Version specifiers](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/version-specifiers/).

```{note}

> Legacy add-on packages might not have a version number, or use an integer version number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Legacy add-on packages might not have a version number.
```

(Integer version numbers are a subset of Python version specifiers, and are still common.)

In old versions of GenericSetup, sorting was done alphabetically, not according to the Python version specifiers.
If you experience problems with upgrade steps, you might need to upgrade GenericSetup, or add a metadata `version` number to align with your package's version number.
```

```{seealso}
{ref}`genericsetup-upgrade-steps-label`
```

(genericsetup-custom-installer-code-label)=

> ## Custom installer code

Author: For this section, see my comment from the original PR at https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1757#discussion_r3230278866.

> In addition to upgrade steps to install and uninstall add-ons, GenericSetup provides a way to run custom Python code when your add-on package is installed and uninstalled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GenericSetup provides a way to run custom Python code before or after a profile is installed.
```

</configure>
```

Then edit {file}`setuphandlers.py`, adding the Python functions `run_before` and `run_after` according to the `pre_handler` and `post_handler` attributes.

```python
def run_before(context):
    # This is run before running the first import step of
    # the default profile.  The context is portal_setup.
    # If you need the same context as you would get in
    # an import step, like setup_various below, do this:
    profile_id = 'profile-your.addonpackage:default'

>     good_old_context = context._getImportContext(profile_id)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Add custom code here...
```

    # ...

def run_after(context):
    # This is run after running the last import step of
    # the default profile. The context is portal_setup.
    # ...
```

> The best practice is to create a {file}`setuphandlers.py` file, and include a function `setup_various()` which runs the required Python code to make changes to the Plone site object.

Reviewer: I'll update from here until the next heading. This should be a separate section on how to add a custom import step.

```{eval-rst}
.. automodule:: Products.GenericSetup.rolemap

>    :members: importRolemap, RolemapImportConfigurator

Author: The docstring in `importRolemap` is malformed. I opened a PR to fix it in https://github.com/zopefoundation/Products.GenericSetup/pull/141.

Once that PR is merged and released, then the docs should be previewed and checked at https://plone6--2083.org.readthedocs.build/backend/generic-setup.html#Products.GenericSetup.rolemap.importRolemap.

Author: Oops, it looks like we need an update in Plone as well. @mauritsvanrees would you please do the honors to bump Products.GenericSetup==5.1.0 to 5.2.0 for both 6.1.x and 6.2.x?

Reviewer 2: I have just bumped it in Plone 6.2 (see https://dist.plone.org/release/6.2-dev/)

But I can't do that for 6.1.  It uses Products.GenericSetup 5.0.0.  Updating this to 5.1 or later means we get a version with native namespaces, which we can't do in Plone 6.1.

Author: Thanks @mauritsvanrees!

I expect that we'll have a 6.2 final release before this PR is merged, so I'll keep this comment open to remind me to check at that time.

Reviewer: I removed this automodule directive. It was showing parts of the implementation of this GS step that are never called directly.
